---
layout: post
title: Using JTidy to clean up non valid html pages
---

A couple of days ago I tried to modify a html page using a DOM. When I tried to convert the page into a Document instance the parser threw some SAXExceptions, complaining about the structure of the document, sort of "this tag needs to be closed" and the like.
The source was html output generated from Docbook. I neither had the time nor the intent to mess around cleaning up the generated html, but could remember there was something called Tidy.
So I searched for a Java library, and there it was. [JTidy](http://jtidy.sourceforge.net/), looking like an unmaintained project, but being the right tool to clean up a html page and transform it into valid xhtml.
The API is pretty straight forward.

This is the implementation for converting (non-valid) html to a Document instance:

    // Create instance
    final Tidy tidy = new Tidy();

    // Remove presentational clutter (don't really know
    // what exactly that does, but sounds great ;-)
    tidy.setMakeClean( true );

    // Use XHTML output
    tidy.setXHTML( true );

    // Make document readable by indenting the elements
    tidy.setSmartIndent( true );

    // The html document received by a get request
    final String s = ...;

    // Converting the page into a Document instance
    final Document document = tidy.parseDOM( new ByteArrayInputStream( s.getBytes() ) , null );

That's it, by now you have your html as a Document instance that you can freely manipulate.
The only thing I noticed was that the method `node.setTextContent()` does not work. But you can use

    node.appendChild( document.createTextNode( ... ) )

, that does what you want.

The second part is about writing your Document to a string:

    // Create a stream to write the output to
    final ByteArrayOutputStream outStr2 = new ByteArrayOutputStream();

    // Write modified Document to an output stream
    tidy.pprint( document , outStr2 );

    // Create a StringBuilder
    final StringBuilder builder = new StringBuilder();

    // Write output stream content to string builder
    builder.append( new String( outStr2.toByteArray() , "UTF-8" ) );

    // Create String
    final String validXHTML = builder.toString();

At the end of the block you have your valid XHTML in a String.
